# Data Structures

## Introduction

<p>A data structure is some structure chosen for organising, managing, and storing data.</p>
<p>Arrays, sets, maps, stacks, queues etc. are some commonly-used data structures.</p>
<p>We have already covered several basic data structures over the previous weeks of this workshop. In this section, we will be jumping straight ahead into some of the more advanced and useful ones.</p>

## `pair`

<p>A pair is an ordered collection of two elements.</p>
<p>One use case of pairs is representing points on the cartesian plane, as each point has two values associated with it - its x-coordinate and y-coordinate.</p>

```cpp
pair<int, int> p;
p.first = 3;
p.second = 5;

// different types + nesting also supported
pair<string, pair<int, int>> q;
q.first = "hello";
q.second = {1, 2}; // initialiser lists can be used to initialise pairs
```

<p>While comparing two pairs, the first elements in each pair are first compared, followed by their second elements.</p>
<p>This means that they also easily support sorting like other data types.</p>

## `stack`

<p>A stack is an ordered collection of elements in which elements are added and removed from only one side (usually called the top).</p>
<p>To visualise the working of a stack, think of a stack of books.</p>
<p>When you want to add a new book to the stack, you can only place it at the top.</p>
<p>Similarly, the only book in a stack that can be directly removed is the top-most one.</p>
<p>Removing books apart from the topmost one would require removing all the books above it first.</p>
<p>A stack is often described as a Last In First Out (LIFO) data structure as the last element to be inserted into a stack is also the first to be removed.</p>

```cpp
stack <int> s;
```

<p>Here are some commonly-used stack methods.</p>

1. `push (x)` - adds the element `x` to the end of the stack
2. `top ()` - returns the topmost element 
3. `pop ()` - removes the topmost element
4. `size ()` - returns the number of elements
5. `empty ()` - removes every element

Don't forget to check if the stack is non-empty before calling `top()` or `pop()` to prevent runtime errors.

Two great use cases for stacks in CP are to find the position of the matching bracket in an expression and to find the next smaller / larger element of all elements in an array.

## `queue`

<p>A queue is also an ordered collection of elements, but what differentiates queues from stacks is the fact that elements are removed from the side opposite to the one where elements are added.</p>
<p>Queues are named as such because queues in the real world are also First In First Out (FIFO) - the first element to be inserted (enter) into a queue is the first to be removed (exit).</p>
<p>The below code instantiates a queue of integers.</p>

```cpp
queue <int> q;
```

<p>Given below are some commonly-used queue methods.</p>

1. `push (x)` - adds the element `x` to the end of the queue
2. `front ()` - returns the first element
3. `back ()` - returns the last element
4. `pop ()` - removes the first element
5. `size ()` - returns the number of elements
6. `empty ()` - removes every element

## `priority_queue`

<p>A priority queue is similar to a regular queue, except that the elements in a priority queue are sorted according to their values and not according to the order in which they are inserted in.</p>
<p>This means that <b>no matter what order elements are inserted in, they will always remain sorted in ascending order inside the container.</b></p> 
<p>The below code instantiates a priority queue of integers.</p>

```cpp
priority_queue <int> pq;
```

<p>To demonstrate the difference between a regular queue and a priority queue, let us consider a queue <code>q</code> and a priority queue <code>pq</code>, both of which currently hold the elements <code>[2, 3, 5, 11, 13, 17]</code>.<p>
<p>We now add the element <code>7</code> to both <code>q</code> and <code>pq</code>.</p>
<p>In <code>q</code>, the elements now follow the order <code>[2, 3, 5, 11, 13, 17, 7]</code>, as new elements always get added to the end regardless of their value.</p>
<p>However, in <code>pq</code>, the elements are stored in the order <code>[2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17]</code>, as new elements are added in such a way that the ascending order is maintained.</p>
<p>Now, let us look at some commonly-used priority queue methods.</p>

1. `push (x)` - adds the element `x` to the priority queue
2. `top ()` - returns the greatest element
3. `pop ()` - removes the greatest element
4. `size ()` - returns the number of elements
5. `empty ()` - removes every element

You can specify the comparator of the sorting as well:
```cpp
// for ascending order, use the inbuilt `greater` comparator
priority_queue<int, vector<int>, greater<int>> pq;
```

An interesting thing to note is that a `set` / `map` is nearly identical to a `priority_queue`, with the main difference being that `set` / `map` sorts in ascending while `prioriity_queue`sorts in descending by default.

## `iterator`

<p>An iterator is a object that can point to elements in C++ STL data structures.</p>
<p>It is the STL equivalent of regular C++ pointers.</p>
<p>For the purpose of simplicity, in this section, we will be dealing with iterators to <code>vector</code> elements specifically.</p>
<p>Here is the syntax for defining an iterator <code>it</code>.</p>

```cpp
vector <int> :: iterator it;
```

<p>Let us look at how to loop over the elements of a vector using iterators.</p>

```cpp
for (it = arr.begin (); it < arr.end (); it ++) {
    
}
```

<p>The <code>begin ()</code> method returns an iterator to the first element of the vector.</p>
<p>The <code>end ()</code> method, however, does not return an iterator to the last element like how you would expect it to.</p>
<p>Instead, it returns a pointer to an imaginary element that lies right after the last element.</p>
<p>Incrementing an iterator shifts the iterator one element to the right, and decrementing it shifts it to the left.</p>

```
   [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]    
    ^                    ^  
  begin ()             end ()
```

<p>Here are two cool methods used on sorted vectors that work using iterators.</p>
<p><code>lower_bound (arr.begin (), arr.end (), x)</code> returns an iterator pointing to the smallest element in <code>arr</code> whose value is greater than or equal to <code>x</code>.</p>
<p><code>upper_bound (arr.begin (), arr.end (), x)</code> returns an iterator pointing to the largest element in <code>arr</code> whose value is less than or equal to <code>x</code>.</p>

Since these methods use binary search, their time complexity is only $O(n log n)$.

<p>Note that <code>sort()</code>, <code>lower_bound()</code> and <code>upper_bound</code> all take in iterators as parameters, the first one denoting the left-most element and the second one denoting the right-most element in the range to be considered.</p>


## Optimal Task Scheduling

<p>We are given a list of tasks that need to be completed.</p>
<p>Each task has its own duration and deadline before which it needs to be completed.</p>
<p>The problem is to find the maximum number of tasks that can be completed if we schedule the tasks optimally.</p>

### Example

<table>
<tr>
<th>ID</th>
<th>Deadline</th>
<th>Duration</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>1</td>
<td>5</td>
<td>3</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>2</td>
<td>8</td>
<td>4</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>3</td>
<td>9</td>
<td>2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>4</td>
<td>15</td>
<td>5</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>5</td>
<td>18</td>
<td>6</td>
</tr>
</table>

<p>The highest number of tasks that can be completed is <code>4</code>.</p>
<p>One strategy to achieve this is given below.</p>

1. Start task <code>1</code> at the <code>0<sup>th</sup></code> minute.
2. Start task <code>2</code> at the <code>3<sup>rd</sup></code> minute.
3. Start task <code>3</code> at the <code>7<sup>th</sup></code> minute.
4. Start task <code>5</code> at the <code>9<sup>th</sup></code> minute.

### Solution

<p>There is a greedy approach to solving this problem.</p>
<p>First, we store all the elements in a vector, and sort them in descending order of their deadlines.</p>
<p>Each task will be represented by a pair - the deadline and duration.</p>
<p>We process the tasks one-by-one in the decreasing order of their deadlines.</p>
<p>The <code>i<sup>th</sup></code> task is first inserted into a priority queue.</p>
<p>We then calculate the time <code>t</code> between the deadline of the <code>i<sup>th</sup></code> task and the <code>(i-1)<sup>th</sup></code> task.</p>
<p>We use the priority queue to find the task with the least duration of time and execute it.</p>
<p>This process continues as long as the total time duration of the tasks remains below <code>t</code>.</p>
<p>If a task cannot be completely executed under the time <code>t</code>, the portion of it that can be executed is and the rest is put back into the priority queue.</p>

The running time of this algorithm is $O (n log n)$.

<details>

<summary><b>Implementation</b></summary>

```cpp
void solve () {
    int n;
    cin >> n;
    vector < pair <int, int> > jobs;
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i ++) {
        pair <int, int> j;
        int dl, dur;
        cin >> dl >> dur;
        j.first = dl;
        j.second = dur;
        jobs.push_back (j);
    }
    sort (jobs.rbegin (), jobs.rend ());
    priority_queue < pair <int, int> > q;
    int result = 0;
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i ++) {
        pair <int, int> j_inv;
        // The minus sign is a common trick to make the elements in ascending order
        j_inv.first = - jobs [i].second;
        j_inv.second = jobs [i].first;
        q.push (j_inv);
        int t = jobs[i].first - (i != n - 1 ? jobs [i + 1].first : 0);
        while (t > 0) {
            pair <int, int> j = q.top ();
            q.pop ();
            // Don't forget to flip the sign back :)
            j.first = - j.first;
            if (j.first <= t) {
                t -= j.first;
                result ++;
            } else {
                pair <int, int> j_new;
                j_new.first = t - j.first;
                j_new.second = j.second;
                q.push (j_new);
                break;
            }
        }
    }
    cout << result << "\n";
}
```

</details>

## Links

1. [Pairs](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/pair-in-cpp-stl/)
2. [Stacks](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/stack-in-cpp-stl/)
3. [Queues](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/queue-cpp-stl/)
4. [Priority Queues](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/priority-queue-in-cpp-stl/)
5. [Video on scheduling problem](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nnHRrnZsPwo)
6. [Nearest Smaller Values](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1645)
7. [Course Schedule III](https://leetcode.com/problems/course-schedule-iii/)
8. [The Skyline Problem](https://leetcode.com/problems/the-skyline-problem/)
9. [Task Scheduler](https://leetcode.com/problems/task-scheduler/)
10. [Concert Tickets](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1091)


