# Intermediate Math

## Modular Inverse

Previously, we saw some properties of modular arithmetic and modular exponenetiation by squaring. Instead of division, modular systems have the concept of a (multiplicative) inverse:

$`a \cdot a^{-1} \equiv 1 \, (mod \, m)`$

It can be proven that the inverse exists iff $gcd(a, m) = 1$ and is unique when it exists. Instead of division, we multiply by the inverse.

To compute the modular inverse, we use Fermat's Little Theorem: for any prime $m$ and integer $a$:

$`a^m \equiv a \, (mod \, m)`$

If $a$ is not divisible by $m$, it is equivalent to:

$`a^{m-1} \equiv 1 \, (mod \, m)`$

For a prime modulus $m$, all $a \in \\{ 1, 2 ... m - 1 \\}$ are coprime to $m$ and so modular inverse exists for these $a$. Multiplying by the modular inverse, we get:

$`a^{m-2} \equiv a^{-1} \, (mod \, m)`$

This means that to find the modular inverse, we simply have to raise it to the power $m - 2$ using modular exponentiation.

Note that this only works for prime $m$ and $a \in \\{ 1, 2 ... m - 1 \\}$.

We can apply this in combinatorics related questions.

## Modular Combinatorics

We usually precompute factorials once before running the test cases to prevent repetition. 

Note that for $i \ge 1$:

$$ i! = i * (i - 1)! $$

We can use this to easily compute all factorials upto $MAX$ in $O(MAX)$ time:

```cpp
ll MOD = 1000000007;
ll MAX = 100000;
vector<ll> fact(MAX + 1);

void precomp()
{
    fact[0] = 1;
    for (int i = 1; i <= MAX; i++)
        fact[i] = (i * fact[i - 1]) % MOD;
}
```

One of the most used functions in combinatorics is the 'choose' function defined as:

$$ \binom{n}{r} = C_{r}^{n} = \frac{n!}{r!(n-r)!} $$

We can use the modular inverse to calculate this easily.

## Linear Sieve

Previously, we looked at the Sieve of Eratosthenes as a method of finding all primes less than $n$. While its complexity was $`O(n \, log(log \, n)))`$, the linear sieve runs in $O(n)$. While this may not seem like much of a difference, it also allows you to compute the prime factorisation of any number in $`O(log \, n)`$, which is very useful in many problems.

We compute two arrays: $spf$, which stores the smallest prime factor of each number, and $primes$, a ordinary vector that holds all primes. We initialise $spf$ with zeroes to assume that they are all prime.

We then iterate from 2 to $n$. For the current number $i$, we have two cases:
 - If $spf_i = 0$, $i$ is prime since we could not find any smaller factors to mark it as composite. So, we assign $spf_i = i$ and append to the $primes$ vector.
 - If $spf_i \neq 0$, we must update the appropriate multiples of $i$. For all $primes_j \le spf_i$, we set $spf_{i * primes_j} = primes_j$.

While it should be easy to see that this will not miss any primes, it takes a little more effort to show that it marks all composite numbers correctly. Note that by definition, every number $i$ has a unique representation of the form:

$$ i = spf_i \cdot x $$

where $x$ doesn't have any prime factors less than $spf_i$. This implies that:

$$ spf_i \le spf_x $$

For every $x$, our algorithm goes through all the primes it could be multiplied with (up to $spf_x$) to get the numbers of the above form. This proves that the algorithm goes through every prime & compositr number exactly once ad so the time complexity is $O(n)$.

```cpp
ll N = 1000000;
vector<ll> spf(N + 1, 0);
vector<ll> primes;

void precomp()
{
    for (int i = 2; i <= N; i++)
    {
        if (spf[i] == 0)
        {
                spf[i] = i;
                primes.pb(i);
        }
        for (int j = 0; j < primes.size() && primes[j] <= spf[i] && i * primes[j] <= N; j++)
            spf[i * primes[j]] = primes[j];
    }
}
```

Now, to find the prime factorisation of a number, we can simply repeatedly divide by its smallest prime factor while storing their values in a `map`:

```cpp
map<ll, ll> prime_factorise(ll x)
{
    map<ll, ll> res;
    while (x != 1)
    {
        res[spf[x]]++;
        x /= spf[x];
    }
    return res;
}
```

The number of times the loop runs will be the number of prime factors (counted with multiplicity). It is not too hard to see that the worst case will be when it is a power of two and in that case the time complexity will be $O(log n)$.

## Links

 - [Modular Inverse](https://cp-algorithms.com/algebra/module-inverse.html#finding-the-modular-inverse-using-binary-exponentiation)
 - [Linear Sieve](https://cp-algorithms.com/algebra/prime-sieve-linear.html)
 - [Binomial Coefficients](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1079)
 - [Counting Divisors](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1713)
 - [Divisor Analysis](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/2182)
 - [Creating Strings II](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1715)
 - [Distributing Apples](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1716)
 - [Christmas Party](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1717)
 - [Santa's Bot](https://codeforces.com/contest/1279/problem/D)
