# Graph Traversal

There are two basic graph traversal algorithms: 
- Depth First Search (DFS)
- Breadth First Search (BFS).

Both do similar things: from one vertex $u$, go to another unvisited vertex $v$ by following the edge $(u, v)$. They are just using different underlying data structures (usually implicit–stack/recursion for DFS versus a queue for BFS) and so the order of visited nodes is different. 

Both DFS and BFS are $O(V+E)$ algorithms. However, on a case by case basis, one is more natural and efficient to implement than the other.

You can look [this demo]((https://visualgo.net/en/dfsbfs?slide=1)) for a cool visualization of graph traversal.

## Breadth First Search

BFS begins from a source and traverses nodes "breadth" wise. Nodes are traversed in order of shortest distance from the source node, which makes it useful to find distances from the source. The algorithm works alike for both directed and unweighted graphs. Finding distances using BFS, however, works only for unweighted graphs.

The BFS uses a queue to simulate the graph traversal. We push nodes into the queue in the order of distances (the BFS order). Note that the front of the queue always will have the closest node to the source, and the source itself in the beginning of the BFS.

In every iteration, we pop the first node from the queue and push all its adjacent unvisited vertices into the queue. Therefore, each node is visited atmost once. We can find the distances from the source while doing the BFS traversal itself. 

Suppose the node $a$ has a distance $d$ from the source $s$. The node $a$ is then popped from the queue and an adjacent node $b$ is pushed into the queue. Since the graph is unweighted, the distance from $b$ to the source $s$ will be $d + 1$. Using this property, we find the distances from the source $s$. The initial node pushed into the queue is the source itself with distance as 0.

```cpp
void bfs(int source) {
    vector<int> d(n, -1);  //-1 is unvisited
    d[source] = 0;
    queue<int> q;
    q.push(source);
    while(!q.empty()) {
        int v = q.front(); q.pop();
        for(int u : g[v]) {  //g is adjacency list of the graph
            if(d[u] == -1) {
                d[u] = d[v] + 1;
                q.push(u);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

You can also do a BFS from multiple sources: instead of pushing just the single source into the queue initially, you push all the sources into the queue (with their distances marked as 0). We can use this to find the minimum distance of any node v to any of the sources. This is a technique known as multi-source BFS.

## Depth First Search (DFS)

Starting from a source vertex, DFS will traverse the graph ‘depth-first’. Every time it hits a branching point (a vertex with more than one neighbors), DFS will choose one of the unvisited neighbor(s) and visit this neighbor vertex. 

DFS repeats this process and goes deeper until it reaches a vertex where it cannot go any deeper. When this happens, DFS will ‘backtrack’ and explore another unvisited neighbor(s), if any. One call of `dfs(u)` will only visit all vertices that are directly / indirectly connected to (or reachable from) vertex u.

There are two ways to implement DFS: using recursion or a stack. The stack implementation is rarely used in competitive programming, mainly because using recursion is much shorter and cleaner.

(Sidenote: the recursive implementation actually uses the fact that function calls also operate on an internal stack, which means that coneceptually the two approaches are still the same.)

```cpp
set<int> seen;
void dfs(int cur)
{
    seen.insert(cur);
    for (auto &[v, w] : list[u])
    {
        if (seen.count(v))
        dfs(v);
    }
}
```

One easy application of DFS is in checking if a directed graph is acyclic or not as directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) have very useful properties that can simplify certain types of problems greatly.

We can simply run DFS / BFS from some source vertex. If we see a vertex that we have already seen, we have just traversed a cycle. Running a DFS from this vertex and storing the sequence of nodes we visit will give you the cycle.

## Connected Components

A connected component is a maximal connected subgraph (it is a connected subgraph that is not part of any larger connected subgraph). Any graph can be partitioned into a number of connected components and in many graph problems, we come up with a solution for a connected graph and extend it for all graphs by repeating for each connected component.

To list all connected components, we first pick some vertex and then run DFS / BFS to find all vertices  that are connected to it. The set of vertices we visit forms a connected component. We then pick some vertex we have not visited and repeat until we visit every single vertex.

```cpp
int seen[n];
vector<int> comp;

void dfs(int cur)
{
    if (seen[cur]) return;
    seen[cur] = 1;
    comp.pb(i);
    for (auto &i : g[cur])
    {
        dfs(i);
    }
}

int main()
{
    // ...graph input in g...
    vector<vector<int>> comps;
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
    {
        if (seen[i]) continue;
        comp.clear();
        dfs(i);
        comps.push_back(comp);
    }
}
```

## Flood Fill

Flood fill is similar to BFS and DFS. The only change is that instead of nodes of a graph, we are dealing with adjacent squares in a 2D grid. You can think of the cells in the grid as nodes, and when two cells are next to each other, you can make an edge between them.

Here is some code that finds the size of the connected component that encloses $(r, c)$ in a 2D grid:
```cpp
int dr[] = { 1, 1, 0,-1,-1,-1, 0, 1};
int dc[] = { 0, 1, 1, 1, 0,-1,-1,-1};                // the order is: // S/SE/E/NE/N/NW/W/SW

int floodfill(int r, int c, char c1, char c2)        // returns the size of CC 
{ 
   if ((r < 0) || (r >= R)) return 0;                // outside grid, part 1
   if ((c < 0) || (c >= C)) return 0;                // outside grid, part 2 
   if (grid[r][c] != c1) return 0;                   // does not have color c1
   int ans = 1;                                      // (r, c) has color c1
   grid[r][c] = c2;                                  // to avoid cycling

  for (int d = 0; d < 8; ++d)
    ans += floodfill(r+dr[d], c+dc[d], c1, c2);      // the code is neat as we use dr[] and dc[]
  return ans;
}
```

## Bipartite Graphs

A bipartite graph is a graph whose nodes can be partitioned into two sets such that each edge is from one set to another and no edge connects nodes in the same set. 

Another way to think about it as that each node can be 'coloured' in one of two colours and no two nodes of the same colour are adjacent. Many problems often not even evident to be a graph problem can be solved by modelling it as a bipartite graph problem.

Lets look at the problem [Among Us](https://www.codechef.com/INOIPRAC/problems/AMONGUS2) from INOI 2021.

There are $N$ astronauts (numbered $1$ to $N$) who suspect there are parasites among them and $Q$ statements from them. Each statement made by astronaut $i$ about $j$ is of two types:
- Type 1 : i accuses j of being a parasite
- Type 2 : i vouches j of being a human.

Given that no human tells a lie and no parasite tells the truth, you need to find whether the statements made by the astronauts are consistent. If they are consistent, report the maximum possible number of parasites.

For the solution, we'll call the two types of people liars and truthfuls.

There are two types of statements.

- `1  i  j` : $i$ accuses $j$ of being a liar.

  If $i$ is truthful, then $j$ is a liar.
  
  If $i$ is a liar, then $j$ is truthful.

- `2  i  j` : $i$ vouches of $j$ being truthful.

  If $i$ is truthful, then $j$ is truthful.
  
  If $i$ is a liar, then $j$ is a liar.

This means that any pair $(i,j)$ associated with type 1 statements are of opposite types and those associated with type 2 statements are of the same types.

This means that we can model the problem as a graph with $N$ nodes and $Q$ edges where each edge is of 2 types: a type 1 edge connects two nodes $i$ and $j$ of opposite colours while a type 2 edge connects two nodes $i$ and $j$ of the same colour.

We can then colour the nodes using DFS by arbitarily asssigning a colour to the starting node. If the same node is coloured twice with opposite colours, it is inconsistent.

Since we can always flip the colour of all nodes and still have a valid colouring, count the number of nodes of each kind of colour and print the maximum among them for the answer.
   
## Problems

- [Labyrinth](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1193)
- [Maze](https://codeforces.com/problemset/problem/377/A)
- [Wealth Disparity](https://www.codechef.com/INOIPRAC/problems/INOI1601)
- [Multihedgehog](https://codeforces.com/contest/1068/problem/E)
- [Department Strengths](https://www.codechef.com/INOIPRAC/problems/INOI2001)
- [Counting Rooms](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1192)
- [Building Roads](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1666)
- [Labyrinth](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1193)
- [Icy Perimeter](http://www.usaco.org/index.php?page=viewproblem2&cpid=895)
- [Fence](http://www.usaco.org/index.php?page=viewproblem2&cpid=895)
- [UVa 00469 - Wetlands of Florida](https://onlinejudge.org/index.php?option=onlinejudge&Itemid=8&page=show_problem&problem=410)
- [Building Teams](https://cses.fi/problemset/task/1668)
