# Introduction to Competitive Coding

<p><i>This section provides basic information about competitive coding.</i></p>
<p><i>If you are already familiar with what competitive coding is, proceed to the next section.</i></p>

## What is Competitive Coding?

<p><a href = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Competitive_programming">Competitive coding</a> is a mind sport which involves coding efficient solutions to logical problems.</p>
<p>Participating teams / individuals compete with each other in order to solve the most number of problems in the least amount of time.</p>

## Why do I need to learn CC?

<p>Competitive coding is quite popular among college students primarily because IT companies ask CC-related questions in the coding rounds of their recruitment process.</p>
<p>However, it is not necassary that you learn CC just to boost your placement prospects.</p>
<p>CC improves your logical skills as it encourages you to think of different approaches to solve a particular problem.</p>
<p>This in turn makes you a better programmer in general.</p>

## What are the best programming languages for CC?

<p>Major competitive programming platforms generally contain options for you to submit solutions coded in most major programming languages.</p>
<p>However, C++ is by far the most popular programming language used for CC.</p>
<p>As C++ is closer to low-level programming languages than other languages like Java and Python, C++ programs take less time to execute making it ideal for CC.</p>
<p>C++ also offers a wide range of functions through its Standard Template Library (STL), which you will learn about over the course of the workshop.</p>
<p>That being said, it is okay if you start CC with another language like Python or Java for the time being if you are not familiar with C++ yet.</p>

## What is the ICPC?

<p>The <a href = "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Collegiate_Programming_Contest">International Collegiate Programming Contest</a> is an annual competitive coding competition contested by university students from around the world.</p>
<p>The contest consists of multiple rounds held at different levels, starting with the regionals and culminating in the world finals.</p>
<p>Teams from BPHC have put up strong performances in the ICPC.</p>
<p>At the ICPC 2021 World Finals, the team from BPHC consisting of <b>Ashish Gupta</b>, <b>Mahir Shah</b> and <b>Kunal Verma</b> finished rank 61 in the world.</p>
<p>They were among the top 7 Indian teams that competed at the finals.</p>
<p>The team from BPHC, consisting of <b>Hriday Gajulapalli</b>, <b>Jeevan Jyot Singh</b> and <b>Pranav Rajagopalan</b>, will complete at the upcoming ICPC 2023 World Finals.</p>

## What are the most popular websites for CC?

<p>There are several websites that hold compeititve coding contests and contain problems to practice.</p>
<p>Here is a list of the most popular ones:</p>

1. [Codeforces](https://codeforces.com/)
2. [CodeChef](https://www.codechef.com/)
3. [CSES](https://cses.fi/)
4. [AtCoder](https://atcoder.jp/)
5. [LeetCode](https://leetcode.com/)

<p>Codeforces is generally regarded as the most popular competitive coding platform.</p>
<p>It is known for holding contests quite frequently and its extensive problemset.</p>
<p>In the next section, we will look at Codeforces in detail.</p>
