# A sample CC problem

<p><i>In this section, we will describe the structure of a typical CC problem with an example, and provide its solution at the end.</i></p>

## Structure of a typical CC problem

<p>A CC problem typically consists of five parts.</p>

1. Problem statement
2. Description of input
3. Description of output
4. Sample input
5. Sample output

## Problem statement

> <p>You are given a number <code>n</code>.</p>
> <p>You are required to find the <code>n</code>th prime number.</p>
> <p>For example, if <code>n = 1</code>, you must output 2 (as the 1st prime number is 2).</p>
> <p>Similarly, if <code>n = 4</code>, you must output 7 (as the 4th prime number is 7).</p>
> <p>How do you solve this problem?</p>

<p>In this example, the problem statement is quite direct and the problem at hand is explained clearly.</p>
<p>However, this is not the case with Codeforces problem statements in general.</p>
<p>Codeforces problem statements are generally accompanied by a story, and it is upto the problem solver to gauge what the problem is really asking for.</p>

## Description of input and output

> <p>The first line of input consists of a single integer <code>t</code> - the number of testcases.</p>
> <p>The following t lines each consist of a single integer <code>n</code> (<code>1 ≤ n ≤ 1000</code>).</p>

<p>The input provided to a problem always follows a well-defined format, which is described following the problem statement.</p>
<p>Each input value is accompanied by its constraints, which will come in handy while designing your algorithm, as you will see in the next section.</p>

> <p>The output should consist of t lines, each line containing the answer to its corresponding testcase.</p>
> <p>The answer to each testcase consists of a single integer - the <code>n</code>th prime number.</p>

<p>Similarly, the user is expected to output the answer to the problem in a particular format.</p>

## Solution

<p>The simplest approach to solving this problem is to check whether each number, starting from 1, is a prime or not.</p>
<p>A separate variable will keep track of the number of primes we have found.</p>
<p>When the value of this variable becomes <code>n</code>, we will end the program as it would mean that we found the <code>n</code>th prime number.</p>
<p>The question now is: how do you check if a number <code>x</code> is prime?</p>
<p>We will count the number of numbers from 1 to <code>x</code> that divide <code>x</code> (which will be the number of factors of <code>x</code>), and if that number is 2, we can say that <code>x</code> is a prime.</p>

<details>
<summary><b>C++ Implementation</b></summary>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

void solve()
{
    int n;
    cin >> n;
    int x = 1, count = 0;

    while (count < n)
    {
        int factors = 0;
        for (int i = 1; i <= x; i++)
        {
            if (x % i == 0)
                factors++;
        }

        if (factors == 2)
            count++;

        if (count == n)
            cout << x << endl;
        else
            x++;
    }   
}

int main()
{
    int t;
    cin >> t;
    for (int i = 0; i < t; i++)
        solve();
    return 0;
}
```
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Python Implementation</b></summary>

```py
def solve():
    n = int(input())
    x = 1
    count = 0

    while count < n:
        factors = 0
        for i in range(1, x + 1):
            if x % i == 0:
                factors += 1

        if factors == 2:
            count += 1
            
        if count == n:
            print(x)
        else:
            x += 1

t = int(input())
for i in range(t):
    solve()
```
</details>

<p>Do note that this is not the most efficient way to solve this problem.</p>
<p>This is because the nested loops will result in the program taking a large amount of time to execute when <code>n</code> is large.</p>
<p>In competitive coding, for tougher problems, simple approachesm (although correct) may not work due to constraints on time of execution and memory.</p>
<p>As you become better at competitive coding, you should find better and more efficient ways to solve a given problem.</p>
<p>In the next section, we will discuss time complexity, which is an essential tool in helping you evaluate the efficiency of your algorithms.</p>
