# C++ Quickstart


While most major platforms let you use any programming language, most competitive programmers use either C++, Java or Python. Out of these, C++ is the most popular due to its concise syntax, fast execution and large standard template library (STL). 

Here, we'll look at setting up a local C++ environment and where to learn the basics of the language, along with some specific tips for competitive coding.

A bit of advice: yes, I know learning a new programming language will seem quite daunting, especially if you try to do it in a short time frame. However, the important thing to understand is that **concepts in competitive coding (and algorithmic thinking in general) are independent of programming language**.

This means that **you can start CC in any programming language you choose and switch later if you want**.  So, instead of deep diving and trying to finish all of this at once, you could do certain parts while solving actual CC problems over the next week or two. This would serve as practice and strengthen your understanding of C++ and CC as a whole.

<br>

## Installation:

We will be using `g++` , the C++ compiler from the GNU Compiler Collection (GCC). While most compilers will behave identically in most situations, `g++` has a few advantages we will see later.

- **Windows:**

	Install [MinGW](https://www.mingw-w64.org/) and add the location of the executable `C:\MinGW\bin`) to your `PATH`.

- **Linux:**

	Use your favourite package manager to install the `g++` package.

- **Mac:**

	Install [Homebrew](https://brew.sh/) and then run:
	```
	brew install gcc
	```
	As of writing, this installs `g++-13` ([source](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/gcc)). To make it available simply as `g++`, run:
	```
	sudo ln -s $(which g++-13) /usr/local/bin/g++
	```


To check your installation, running this command should print your `g++` version:
```
g++ --version
```

We recommend using a lightweight text editor like [Neovim](https://neovim.io/)  or [Sublime Text](https://www.sublimetext.com/) for CC.

When compiling and running your code, you can easily read from an input file or write to an output file using `<` or `>`:
```
g++ -o prog prog.cpp <in.txt >out.txt && ./prog
```

We **do not recommend using the default build system** ("the shiny green button") of these editors as these sometimes use different versions / compilers of C++, causing strange errors.

Instead, run the commands in your terminal.

<br>

## Resources:

Some nice resources for learning C++:
- https://cplusplus.com/doc/tutorial/ (fairly concise)
- https://www.learncpp.com/ (more in depth)
- Chapter 2 and parts of Chapter 3 of [PAPS](https://www.csc.kth.se/~jsannemo/slask/main.pdf) (catered specifically for CC)

The things you should know:
- Variables & Data Types
- I/O & Operators
- Control Flow (`if-else`, `switch`)
- Loops (`for`, `while`, `do-while`)
- Functions & Recursion
- Arrays, Vectors & Strings

You don't need to focus too much on topics like pointers, structs, templates and classes for now since they are rarely used in competitive coding.

<br>

## C++ for CP:

While most resources will teach you about C++ in general, here are a few things specifically useful for CC:

- **Importing Libraries:**
  
	Instead of including many header files separately, you can import the entire standard library in one line:
	```cpp
	#include <bits/stdc++.h>
	```
	This is not a common to all C++ compilers and is one of the reasons competitive programmers prefer `g++`.
<br>



- **Arrays, Vectors & Strings**:
  
	While normal arrays have fixed size (must be known at compile time), `vector` is a dynamic array:
	```cpp
	int arr1[5];                 // 1D array
	vector<int> vec1(5, -1);     // 1D vector, filled with -1
	int arr2[3][4];              // 2D array
	vector<vector<int>> vec2;    // 2D vector, with size 0
	
	// Add an element to the back
	vec1.push_back(24);
	// Get size of vector
	cout << vec1.size() << " " << vec[0] << " " << vec[5];         
	// Output: 6 -1 24
	```
	`string` is basically just `vector<char>`.
<br>
	
- **Range based loops**:

	You can directly iterate over many data structures without an index variable:
	```cpp
	vector<int> v = [2, 4, 5, 6, 1];
	for (int ele : v)
	{
	    cout << ele << " ";
	}
	// prints all elements in v
	```
	To get the references of the elements (if you want to modify them), use  `&` after the data type:
	```cpp
	vector<int> v(100);
	// takes input into v while adding 1 to all elements
	for (int &ele : v)
	{
	    cin >> ele;
	    ele++;
	}
	```
	We can replace the data type with `auto`  to let the compiler decide for us:
	```cpp
	// input into vector
	for (auto &ele : vec)
	    cin >> ele;
	    
	// print vector
	for (auto ele : vec)
	    cout << ele << " ";
	```
<br>


- **Fast I/O**:
  
	Add these lines at the start of the `main` function:
	```cpp
	ios::sync_with_stdio(false);
	cin.tie(NULL);	
	```
	Also, always use `"\n"` instead of `endl` while using `cout`.
<br>


- **Typedefs & Macros**:
  
  These can be used to make your code much more concise and are usually placed right after `#include <bits/stdc++.h>`.

	`typedef` allows you to give existing data types new names:
	```cpp
	// Now you can use `ll` anywhere instead of `long long`
	typedef long long ll;
	// You can nest your typedefs as well
	typedef vector<ll> vll;
	```
	
	`#define` works in an almost find-and-replace manner and can be used for small snippets:
	```cpp
	// Now, we can simply use `cout << ln` instead of `cout << "\n"``
	#define ln "\n"
	// You can make new names for functions
	#define pb push_back
	// Snippets can also be multiple lines long
	#define fastio ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false); \
					cin.tie(NULL);       
	```
<br>

- **Integer Overflow**:
  
  This is one of the most common bugs in competitive coding and is due to the fixed size of `int` in most languages. While `int` is a 32-bit integer (stores upto `2e9`), **doing any operation on two `int`s will always give you an `int`, no matter what the actual size of the result is**.

  For example, if you multiplied two `int`s with value `1e9`, it would try to store `1e9 * 1e9 = 1e18` into an `int` and will chop off the bits beyond the 32-bit limit to do so.

  We can instead use a 64-bit integer like `long long` (stores upto `9e18`) since most results in CC are guaranteed to be within this limit. Since `long long` is used very frequently, most competitive programmers use:
  
  	```cpp
	// Now you can use `ll` anywhere instead of `long long`
	typedef long long ll;
	```

  However, this is almost never an issue in Python as its integers have no fixed size and can expand to the limit of available memory.
  
  <br>

  
## Practice:

Two good collections of problems that let you practice your general C++ skills are:
- HackerRank - <https://www.hackerrank.com/domains/cpp>   
- HackerEarth - <https://www.hackerearth.com/practice/basic-programming>

Apart from this, you can try implementing basic programs in C++ to get a feel for the language.
